Superconductivity is an example of
an intrinsically many-bodied quantum
effect which doesn't really have
a single particle counterpart.
So it can't be really understood based on
a single particle trend or equation So
in the context of superconductors of
course, these many particles are electrons
that play together in some sense to create
this amazing quantum hearing state.
Now to understand the very
complicated array of many.
Body quantum phenomena.
The first step is to understand
the concept of quantum statistics,
which is an intrinsically quantum
interaction between identical
particles that does really
have a classical counterpart.
So let's say the electrostatic let's say
pulling interaction which depends on
distance and between the two charges.
So this statistical interaction between
identical particles is quite different.
It's imperish whenever you
have identical particles.
They feel each other's presence
independently of the distance
separating data.
So this is very interesting.
And so we're going to learn about it and
also we are going to learn about the two
fundamental classes of particles
with respect to their quantum statistics
like all the bosons and fermions.
And those guys, they lose energy states
[INAUDIBLE] are drastically different.
And we will see that it's actually
a transition in some sense from fermions
like behavior to bosons like behavior
Is exactly what explain Transition
from a regular metal into
quantum superconductors.
Just a few step in defining
quantum statistics.
Let us consider two identical
quantum particles represent
by this blue dust here.
Now let's assume that all
intrinsic properties of
these particles are exactly the same.
And so the question that we're going
to be asking is what happens if we
breathe two particles, in other words
if these two particles exchange places.
So the first particle goes to the place
of the second one and vice versa.
So what it means is that the we
function in this case the wave function
describing these two partial system,
depends, well on the coordinate
of these two partials and
one or two principle some other
quantum that I'm not written.
And so the question we're asking what
happens with this wave function if you
replace r 2 with r 2 and
in vice versa, so it turns out that,
upon this braiding the wave function
requires quantum mechanical phase.
Which is this statistical
phase of hoop 5 and
well, we can sort of get an idea of why
it might happen because the wave function
really is a tool for us to understand
the observable phenomenon.
Most observables answer through
the absolute value of the wave function or
the various metric elements
of the wave function and
the overall face is not really
something that we worry about.
And so we may imagine that even though
from our perspective nothing has changed
since the two particles are identical
whether which one is at which
point doesn't really matter so
we still main principle get
the quantum mechanical phase here and
indeed this happens.
Okay?
So,and so the question that we can ask and
it was asked a long time ago.
What are the possible values of
the quantum statistical phase?
And the answer provided
in his seminal paper.
Entitled, The Connection Between Spin and
Statistics by Wolfgang Pauli.
Who proved that there exists a one-to-one
correspondence between the internal
angular momentum of a particle so called
(spin), That you're going to learn about
a little later in the course and
is quantum statistics.
So, I won't give you a lecture on spin,
because there will be separate
one on that, but I will just mention that
there are just two types of particles
allowed in nature which are,
either integer or half integer spin.
And those differ by how their wave
functions transform other rotations.
So if we rotate our OSA coordinate
system by a certain angle so
this rotation operator that we encounter
would look differently depending
on what kind of spin the particle has and
interestingly enough lets say
spin one half particles, an electron
is an example of such a particle,
its going to be described by circular
presentation of this rotation which upon
repeating it by 360 degrees
actually picks up a minus sign.
As opposed to integer spin particles or
particles with no spins
that don't really change.
Whose weight function does their own
change upon this rotation by 360 degrees.
Now I'm just sort of giving you
a flavor but the outcome of this
spin statistics theorem can be
formulated in a very simple way.
So for particles with integer internal
angular momentum including zero,
the phase here is really 0, so
there's no change in the wave function.
If we replace r1 by r2, nothing changes.
While for
particles with half-integer spin,
this statistical piece thi is equal to pi,
or in other words this sine of r1 and
r2 is equal to minus of sine of r2 and r1.
And this guy's with Huffinger's spin
are half measure spins with fermions.
So just make one comment that it
turns out that this classification
is specific to three-dimensional
relativistic quantum theory to
the world in which we actually live.
But if we consider two
dimensional systems,
which appear as a matter of fact in,
let's say, condense metric context,
so we have three dimensional metals and
two dimensional super conductors.
So there, it turns out that
the possibilities of r phi
are much more interesting,
so apart from zero and
pi we may have extra phase of phi of
which I call in the particles like that.
So the vectinians emerging particles
like that are called any ions and
they run this phi can be a matrix.
In which case,
they're called anonabilian, but this is
the only I'm going to mention about it.
I just want you to know that apart from
these well known possibilities For
fundamental elementary
particles there are other
situations which arise in
condensed metaphysics.
But now, let me focus on these two cases.
So for regular particles,
we have either zero or pi.
So let's assume we're dealing with
fermions let's assume electrons, so
what are the consequences of this minus
sign that we pick up in front of the wave
function.
Doesn't really matter,
it also should be word law.
So let us think about it.
So now what we're really saying again is
that psi r1 and r2 =- psi of r and r1.
And it immediately leads
to a conclusion that for
important keys r1=r2 psi for r1 and
r1 is equals to miles psi r1 and
r1 which means this side is equal to 0.
So what does it mean?
It means that the probability of
finding two identical fermions in
the same point is zero,
because psi is zero.
So well, and
it means that no two identical
fermions can occupy the same point.
And more generally, it turns out that
we can actually generalize this for
an arbitrary representation
of the wave function.
We can prove and, well,
this is the Pauli exclusion principle,
is that no two identical fermions
can occupy the same quantum state.
They cannot have exactly
the same quantum numbers.
But there's no such constraint for bosons.
Okay, so
this has very important consequences.
So this statement again is called
the Pauli exclusion principle, and
for bosons that doesn't apply.
And the consequences are that if
we have a certain quantum state,
let's say an arbitrary quantum state i,
and we want to populate this state with
fermions, there are only two possibilities
for the occupation number of this state.
So the occupation number can either 0 or
1.
Well, for bosons it can be anything.
It can be any 0, 1, 2, can put any number
of bosons we want in this quantum state.
Now what does it mean in
the context of many-body systems,
when we have actually more than one and
two particles,
when we have billions and
billions of identical particles,
as we usually do in quantum systems such
as, let's say, metals and superconductors?
So let us discuss this question first for
a many-boson system,
and what we're actually asking
is what happens, let's say,
if we have many energy levels
that are initially empty.
And we want to know what happens if we
sort of pour identical bosons into this
prescribed landscape of quantum
states with some states i,
with some energies E sub i.
And more specifically what
we're interested in is,
what is the lowest energy state,
the so-called ground state,
that the system would want
to form at low temperatures.
So at low temperatures, the excitations
are going to sort of calm down, and
the system would want to form
the lowest-energy state.
Now since any number of bosons can occupy
any state, so clearly the lowest-energy
state would correspond to essentially
a state in which all bosons,
non-interacting bosons, that is, are
sitting just at the lowest possible level.
Now for a free particle, with dispersion
just having kinetic energy dispersion
p squared over 2 m, some sort of parabolic
dispersion here I'm just plotting it,
in sort of an example of a two-dimensional
system Px Py, and this is the energy,
basically all bosons would want to
drop into this zero momentum state.
Okay, and this kind of state is
called Bose-Einstein condensate,
the state in which a single
quantum mechanical level,
in this case the state of zero momentum or
zero velocity is microscopically occupied.
So this kind of phenomenon has been known
for a long time, since Einstein, but
it was sort of very observed in a clear
way only very recently, in 1995 first.
Now it's observed routinely in
various laboratories including our
own Joint Quantum Institute.
But back in 1995, it was new, and
this discovery was actually awarded
2001 Nobel Prize in physics.
So here I'm showing the following.
So basically what the experimentalists
did, they trapped atoms, bosonic atoms,
in a confined geometry in a certain
trapping potential and cooled them down to
ultra-cool temperatures, and
then removed the trap and let them expand.
And they just took photographs
of these atoms as time went by,
and they saw this peak.
So this is basically the so-called time
of flight expansion, and this peak is,
shows a population,
a density of particles in real space.
So you see that a large number
of particles sort of don't
move too much as time goes by,
and these peaks sort of in real
space is a manifestation of
condensation and momentum space.
So this correspond to particles with zero
velocity, so they just sort of stay still.
So now I would like to mention a very
important circumstance, namely, that these
Bose-Einstein condensates may host a very
interesting phenomenon of superfluidity,
where the condensate of interacting
bosons form a superfluid
which has exactly zero viscosity and which
can flow, therefore, without resistance.
So here, for example, I'm showing a photo
of a superfluid helium in a cup, and
the helium can actually escape
the cup climbing up the walls.
So let me mention that
the phenomenon of superfluidity has
actually been known for a very,
very long time, since 1937,
and it was discovered then
in helium by Pyotr Kapitsa.
And Kapitsa got his Nobel Prize for
this discovery in 1978, well,
a bit too late,
40 years after the initial discovery.
So the mathematical theory of
superfluidity was put together by
Lev Landau, a famous Russian
theorist who got his Nobel Prize for
this theory in 1962, so
actually before Kapitsa.
And let me just mention that
this Nobel Prize was awarded to him after
Landau got into a very serious accident.
Everybody thought he wouldn't survive,
but by some miracle he lived for
a few more years, and
this allowed the Nobel Committee to
award him a long overdue Nobel Prize.
So in any case,
I'm not going to talk too much about the
theory of this superfluidity now, because
it actually requires understanding of the
interactions in Bose-Einstein condensates,
and this is a non-trivial business
interacting many-body states.
But I will just mention that
superfluidity sort of rings of bell in
the context of superconductivity,
because if we want to explain the main
property of a superconductor, namely,
zero resistance state in the
superconductor, we would want essentially
superfluid of electrons which would
move zero viscosity without resistance.
So this is exactly what
the doctor has prescribed.
But there is one little problem with
this explanation of superconductivity,
namely, well,
electrons in the metal are not bosons.
They have a half integer spin one-half, so
they were fermions, so
they do not form a superfluid.
So what do they do?
And to answer this question,
I need to consider the ground
state of many-fermion system now.
We talked about the ground
state of bosons.
Now let me talk about what
happens with fermions if I pour
them into a given energy landscape.
Let's say I have some available levels,
and I have a many-fermion system
that would want to occupy those levels,
and the question is how I minimize energy.
So due to the Pauli exclusion principle,
I cannot allow my fermions to be sitting
on the same lowest-energy state.
So at minimized energy I can only
sort of stack them up one by
one to the lowest-energy states,
as so, until they reach the certain
level called the fermion level,
or fermion energy up here.
And basically this is the picture
of fermion ground state,
which is quite different from
the bosonic ground state.
Now, in the context of a three-dimensional
metal, so what we have is,
well, our energy landscape is given
by the usual dispersion relation,
the energy versus momentum is
equal to p squared over 2m.
So, what I need to do in order to sort
of satisfy the same picture with this
energy is that I will
occupy all momentum states.
So here I have kx, ky, and kz or
could have regular px, py, and pz.
So below a certain momentum
which is called Fermi momentum,
I will have all states occupied.
Just like I have here all these levels
occupied while these levels are all empty.
So in the threshold momentum, just ignore
this red and white dots for the moment.
So below this threshold momentum,
I have all states occupied,
above this threshold momentum
I have all states empty.
And this is exactly the picture
which describes electrons in metals,
actually works amazingly well for metals.
And it's also known that the typical
Fermi temperature in a metal,
the Fermi temperature being
this threshold momentum here,
the PF squared divided by 2m,
this is the Fermi energy,
divided by the Boltzmann constant which
converts energy into temperature.
So if we do this calculation, the typical
Fermi temperature in a metal would
be around 10,000 Kelvin, which is huge.
So even at room temperature,
let alone at 4 Kelvin, so
this energy scale is normal compared
to all other energy scales.
What the final temperature
usually does is that it excites
electrons from below the Fermi surface.
So for instance, I cannot excite
an electron from here to here.
I cannot move.
So this, let me just draw this process and
then I will say it's not allowed, so
I have let's say, an electron here, I can
move it to this point so it's not allowed.
Because both these states are occupied,
so this state's already occupied so
power exclusion would
allow me to do this thing.
But what I can do if I have temperature
I have some energy to spend, so
I can excite an electron,
let's say, from here to here.
So the white point here is an empty
space that the electron leaves behind is
called a hole and the red one is
the actual electronic excitation.
This is exactly the picture of a metal.
And so, these guys basically,
these red guys and these white guys,
these guys form, basically they
are the main players in a typical metal.
But they do not both condense.
They don't form a super-fluid,
they just move around,
and they experience scattering from
one point to a different point,
and this results in the finite resistance.
So how do we reconcile this picture
of a metal with the presence of
superconductivities that is
observed at low temperatures?
So this was again,
a major mystery for many, many years.
Was not at all obvious how to do this.
But of course, there was a hint about
due to the presence of superfluid.
So and well, sort of in retrospect,
it's pretty natural to ask
whether or not it's possible to
somehow convert an electron liquid.
So this is a physical Fermi
liquid into bosonic superfluid.
So this guys a fermion,
so they're not bosons.
So can we make bosonic superfluid to go
out of the fermionic gas, such as here.
Well, it's difficult unless,
I allow my electrons to form
composite objects of two
electron states whose total
spin is either 1 over 0.
Remember the spin of a single
electron is one-half but
if I combine the two of them together,
so it's going to be an integer.
So they were going to be bosons.
And so if I somehow find
a way to form such objects,
well, I could have actually
drawn it like this.
But well, knowing the results,
I'm drawing these objects this way.
But at this stage it doesn't matter.
So if I allow the formation
of two electron states,
these two electrons states
are going to be bosons.
And these bosons would be
able to bose condense and
these guys would be able to form
a superfluid, now a charged superfluid.
And this is great because
this state will superconduct.
And this exactly what happens.
And this balance states of two electrons
are called Cooper pairs, and from
this perspective a superconductor is a
Bose-Einstein condensate of Cooper pairs.
But the main question that remains is
why these Cooper pairs would form?
Why would such states appear?
And this is the question that we are
actually going to answer in the remaining
two segments.
And we're going to solve
the Cooper pairing problem.
And this was also established
connection between this lecture and
the previous lecture when we discussed
bounce states and weak potentials.